---
layout: post
title: "Looking Through DeepVariant's Eyes"
date: 2020-02-20
description: "DeepVariant turns variant-calling into an image classification task. Here we explore what these pileup images look like and try to do the same classification task ourselves. We show easy and difficult examples, including multiallelics. By the end, we have a better intuition for how DeepVariant works."
img: "assets/images/2020-02-20/thumbnail.png"
authors: ["marianattestad","gunjanbaid","awcarroll","pichuan"]
---


**This blog post has an accompanying <a
href="https://colab.research.google.com/github/google/deepvariant/blob/r0.9/docs/cybdv_notebook.ipynb"
target="_blank">Colab notebook</a> where you can play against
DeepVariant and try to beat it at its own game!
First, read on to learn more about the pileup images DeepVariant uses, and then see how
you do at this image classification task yourself!**


DeepVariant is a deep learning-based variant caller. DeepVariant is highly
accurate, the most recent version (v0.9) has SNP F1 of 0.9996 and indel F1 of
0.9981 on the PrecisionFDA Truth Challenge BAM. However, because most
individuals have 4-5 million variants, at this accuracy there are still several
thousand errors. There is still value in improving DeepVariant because each
clinically relevant variant that it can consistently capture means that more
expensive and work-intensive methods can be replaced with a single WES or WGS
test. To improve DeepVariant beyond its current abilities, we need to look
closely at the remaining errors.

The core concept for DeepVariant comes from how human scientists look at a
putative variant in a genome browser like IGV, evaluating the evidence: How many
reads support the variant? Do the reads have good base and mapping quality
scores? Are there any unexpected patterns in read mapping or other variants
nearby?

While DeepVariant’s concept is rooted in how humans would do the task, it is
benchmarked relative to the performance of heuristic and statistical algorithms.
The reason is that humans don’t scale. Looking at 4 million pileups is not
anybody’s idea of a good time. While we don't want to look at millions of
pileups, it can be fun and educational to look at a few dozen of them and see if
we can learn to do this classification task ourselves.

# What DeepVariant sees

DeepVariant has 3 stages: make examples, call variants, and postprocess
variants. The middle stage is when the deep neural network does its
classification, while the first stage prepares data for the neural network, and
the last stage interprets the classifications output by the neural network as
variant calls.

The deep neural network is a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) designed to
classify images, so the data available at each locus is turned into a tensor
that is much like an image. While images usually have three channels (red,
green, and blue), DeepVariant's examples have six channels. In this article we
will show the six channels in a row, but in DeepVariant they are encoded as six
layers in the third dimension, giving each tensor a shape of (100, 221, 6)
corresponding to (height, width, channels). The variant in question is always in
the center of each pileup image, here marked with a small line at the top.

Channels are shown in greyscale below in the following order:

1.  Read base: different intensities represent A, C, G, and T.

2.  Base quality: set by the sequencing machine. White is higher quality.

3.  Mapping quality: set by the aligner. White is higher quality.

4.  Strand of alignment: Black is forward; white is reverse.

5.  Read supports variant: White means the read supports the given alternate
    allele, grey means it does not.

6.  Base differs from ref: White means the base is different from the reference,
    dark grey means the base matches the reference.

![results]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/2020-02-20/first_example.png)

For each tensor, DeepVariant's CNN outputs three genotype likelihoods,
corresponding to how many copies (0, 1, or 2) of the given alternate allele are
present. Most loci are biallelic, meaning there is one putative alternate allele
in addition to the reference. In biallelic loci, a classification of 0 means
homozygous reference, 1 means heterozygous, and 2 means homozygous alternate
(i.e. two alternate alleles are present). For example, the CNN may look at the
pileup above and output (2.076e-07, 0.99999964, 1.5e-07), where the likelihood
of a "1" is very high, and the "postprocess variants" stage will interpret that
as "heterozygous". We will show a multiallelic example later, but for now, let's
build up familiarity through some simpler biallelic examples first.

Here are 3 examples that we would consider canonical easy-to-classify loci, and
that DeepVariant calls confidently and correctly:

![results]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/2020-02-20/canonical_2.png)

The variant above is a "2", which means both chromosomes match the variant
allele, so this locus represents a homozygous alternate locus.

![results]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/2020-02-20/canonical_1.png)

DeepVariant correctly classifies the variant above as a "1", which means that
one of the two alleles matches the variant allele, i.e. it is heterozygous.

![results]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/2020-02-20/canonical_0.png)

This is a "0", which means that there are no copies of the alternate allele
present, and therefore this locus is homozygous reference. While it has a few
supporting reads (channel 5) that caused it to be flagged as a candidate, we see
that the mapping qualities (channel 2) of those reads are poor, and they have
multiple mismatches (channel 6).

All examples in this blog post are from HG002 with read alignments and truth
labels from the NIST Genome in a Bottle (GIAB) Consortium. See the
[DeepVariant WGS case study documentation](https://github.com/google/deepvariant/blob/r0.9/docs/deepvariant-case-study.md)
for a detailed description of this dataset.

Now try these:

A.

![results]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/2020-02-20/easy_A.png)

B.

![results]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/2020-02-20/easy_B.png)

C.

![results]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/2020-02-20/easy_C.png)

D.

![results]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/2020-02-20/easy_D.png)

E.

![results]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/2020-02-20/easy_E.png)


# More difficult examples

Most loci turned out to be pretty easy for us, and for DeepVariant, so we picked
out all the loci that DeepVariant either got wrong or where it was less than 90%
sure of its choice. That makes it a lot more interesting because we skip the
99.8% of variants that would be easy for both us and DeepVariant to get right.

Here is a selection of these "difficult" alleles. Try them yourself, then check
the answers at the bottom of this post.

F.

![results]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/2020-02-20/difficult_F.png)

G.

![results]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/2020-02-20/difficult_G.png)

H.

![results]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/2020-02-20/difficult_H.png)

I.

![results]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/2020-02-20/difficult_I.png)

J.

![results]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/2020-02-20/difficult_J.png)

K.

![results]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/2020-02-20/difficult_K.png)

L.

![results]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/2020-02-20/difficult_L.png)

M.

![results]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/2020-02-20/difficult_M.png)

N.

![results]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/2020-02-20/difficult_N.png)

O.

![results]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/2020-02-20/difficult_O.png)


# Multiallelic variants

We started with biallelic variants above because they are simpler -- there is
only one pileup tensor for each locus, and we are only asking about a single
alternate allele. For multiallelic loci, one tensor is created for each
combination of either one or two alternate alleles, and the likelihoods from
classifying each of those are combined.

For example, a locus with two alternate alleles yields three pileups: alt1,
alt2, and alt1/alt2.

alt1: C -> CATTTT. Classification = 1

![results]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/2020-02-20/multiallelic_A.png)

alt2: C -> CATTTTATTTT. Classification = 1

![results]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/2020-02-20/multiallelic_B.png)

alt1/alt2: C -> CATTTT/CATTTTATTTT. Classification = 2

![results]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/2020-02-20/multiallelic_C.png)

DeepVariant's CNN looks at these three tensors separately and makes a call for
each one, only consolidating the likelihoods into a variant call in the
"postprocess variants" stage. For this example above, the classifications are
alt1: 1, alt2: 1, and alt1/alt2: 2. Think of these classifications as a count of
how many of the indicated allele is present, where the indicated allele
corresponds to the one supported by the white reads in the fifth channel ("read
supports variant"). Indeed, only the fifth channel is different between these
three tensors, so it is an indication to DeepVariant of which allele to consider
in multiallelic cases. This example is a case where the final variant call
should be alt1/alt2, meaning one copy of each variant.

Most multiallelic cases are triallelic like the one above, but the pattern
continues at higher numbers of alleles. E.g. for three alternate alleles: alt1,
alt2, alt3, alt1/alt2, alt1/alt3, alt2/alt3. The following example has three
alternate alleles, so we can see this pattern in action. Here the alleles and
the truth classifications are shown, but remember that the CNN only sees the
tensor with no additional information.

alt1: CT -> C. Classification = 1

![results]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/2020-02-20/easy_multiallelic1_1:55424996_CT_C.channels.png)

alt2: CT -> CTT. Classification = 1

![results]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/2020-02-20/easy_multiallelic1_1:55424996_CT_CTT.channels.png)

alt3: CT -> TTT. Classification = 0

![results]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/2020-02-20/easy_multiallelic0_1:55424996_CT_TTT.channels.png)

alt1/alt2: CT -> C/CTT. Classification = 2

![results]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/2020-02-20/easy_multiallelic2_1:55424996_CT_C-CTT.channels.png)

alt1/alt3: CT -> C/TTT. Classification = 1

![results]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/2020-02-20/easy_multiallelic1_1:55424996_CT_C-TTT.channels.png)

alt2/alt3: CT -> CTT/TTT. Classification = 1

![results]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/2020-02-20/easy_multiallelic1_1:55424996_CT_CTT-TTT.channels.png)

The C/CTT combination gets a 2 here, and the others are consistent in the sense
that each time C or CTT show, the pileup is classified as a 1.

If you want to try some multiallelic examples, the <a
href="https://colab.research.google.com/github/google/deepvariant/blob/r0.9/docs/cybdv_notebook.ipynb"
target="_blank">Colab notebook</a> has sections of easy and difficult multiallelic examples you can play.

# Could we beat DeepVariant?

No, we couldn’t consistently beat DeepVariant using its own pileup images.
Sometimes we would get 7/10 right when it gets 6, but the next time it’s the
opposite. Overall it comes out to DeepVariant being slightly better than us,
which makes sense because it has learned from millions of examples, and we
haven't.

If you have tried going up against DeepVariant in the <a
href="https://colab.research.google.com/github/google/deepvariant/blob/r0.9/docs/cybdv_notebook.ipynb"
target="_blank">Colab notebook</a> you may be saying, "this is not fair, I would do much better if I could use
&lt;my favorite genome browser&gt;!" Well, you can! The bam file is at
`gs://deepvariant/case-study-testdata/HG002_NIST_150bp_50x.bam[.bai]`, and the
reference is `gs://deepvariant/case-study-testdata/hs37d5.fa`, so feel free to
load that into your favorite genome browser and look up each locus as you go
through the game in the Colab. You can even reference other datasets, just not
the GIAB truth VCFs -- no cheating! If you can beat DeepVariant using extra
information that would be generally available for other samples, then maybe we
can use these insights to train a more accurate DeepVariant model.

If a human can beat DeepVariant then knowing how can point us in a direction for
improving it. Even if we can't beat DeepVariant, then just getting used to
looking at these pileup images makes it easier for us to reason about how it
works and to get ideas for experimenting with the representation.

While we couldn't beat DeepVariant ourselves, we found that trying gave us a
better intuition for how DeepVariant works. Perhaps a little friendly human vs.
AI competition can help us work together even better.

# Did you beat DeepVariant?

Tell us about your experience going up against DeepVariant by tweeting
<a href="https://twitter.com/marianattestad"
target="_blank">@marianattestad</a>.

# Answers

Easy: A:1, B:0, C:1, D:2, E:0.

Difficult: shown as truth with [DeepVariant's answer in brackets].

F:1[0], G:0[1], H:0[0], I:0[1], J:1[1], K:0[2], L:2[0], M:1[1], N:1[0], O:2[2]

